Welcome back.
I think it's time for us to figure out what is happening here underneath the hood.
You see I haven't told you the full truth.
This diagram here of our javascript runtime that you'll see on the web all over the place actually has
a missing piece and it's missing because well this is how it was originally like.
But as of yes six with the new updates in JavaScript came another piece of the javascript runtime that
often doesn't get mentioned in older resources.
You see promises are new to JavaScript or they were added quite recently and to accommodate this new
addition we had to change the event loop.
You see the event loop had what we called the callback queue which we've talked about and the callback
to you.
It was also called the task to but with promises we had this thing natively in JavaScript.
Now instead of just using callbacks we now had a native way to handle asynchronous code using promises
so it wasn't really part of the web API.
It's part of JavaScript right Atma script the javascript committee said well we need another two for
our promises and to accommodate this addition they said that well we need another cue called The Job
Q or as some other people might call it the micro task to in this q is similar to the task you are the
callback you just a little smaller but has a higher priority than this.
Q You see it means that the event loop is going to check the job.
Q First a make sure that there's nothing in that.
Q before it starts looking at the callback Q or the task Q so that this has higher priority than this
one so that our diagram of the javascript runtime looks something like this now we have a new addition
of the job.
Q And this job Q is now just like the callback Q in our javascript runtime implemented by the browser.
But the event loop is going to check the job.
Q First make sure that that's empty before we start putting some of the callback Q functions onto the
call stack.
So now our code should make sense.
Right because we first run our program we call set time out which as it turns out is something called
a facade function because it isn't actually javascript it just looks like Javascript.
But underneath the hood it's a web API that calls the timer API to run for 0 seconds and then we get
to set time out which again calls the web API.
And it's a facade function that triggers the timer in the browser to run for 10 milliseconds and as
those things are being processed we go to the next line promise.
Dot resolve says Well that is for the job queue.
It's a promise.
So we're going to send it to the job queue.
And when it resolves which in this case is right away we're going to say hey it's going to resolve and
once it's resolved I want you to console log.
So now these three are out outside of our world and we get to console log and console Lock says three
is a crowd.
So this gets Locke's first because it's not asynchronous and then the event loop says well the job queue
and the micro task queue that has priority.
So I'm not even going to bother checking the callback you first.
I'm going to check the job queue.
Hey job queue.
Do you have anything for me.
And the job is going to say well yes actually I haven't waited that long at all.
I've been waiting for you.
Here's here's some console log for you.
So we log this out and you see here in this case the javascript file hasn't even returned yet and it's
already checking the job queue for us which is again because it has a higher priority.
And then once the job queues cleared the event loop is going to say all right.
Any more on the job queue.
No nothing else.
All right.
I'm going to start going to set time out.
Hey the first set time.
Are you done with your work.
Yep I'm done here.
One is the loneliest number.
You can log that and then it checks the next one Hey are you done with this.
Yep 2 can be as bad as 1.
You can log that to so you see because of this new job queue.
Even though said time it was before the promise stopped then and it should normally log this before
the promise the job queue gets checked first because it has higher priority.
Now I know this is a little bit confusing because the naming is a little bit confusing right and because
we have so many names for these queue.
There's often a lot of confusion around it but the act must script standards stay set.
These are micro tasks or jobs which is where the name comes from while all the other things are like
we've had before a callback queue and task queue.
Now the interesting thing with this implementation is that it's implemented by the browser.
Right.
And we have different browsers and although the implementation is quite standard across all browsers
now you'll still get some few weird kinks because browsers implement this differently where this might
now work as you expect.
For example some legacy browsers might not even have the job queue and might just have the callback
queue.
So that's something that you don't want to rely too heavily on but you do want to be aware that as time
progresses we will have these two queues to look out for.
All right.
The mystery solved.
I hope now you can explain to somebody hey the javascript runtime.
Well we actually have a job.
You don't forget about I'll see in the next one maybe.